so it was announced today that the nobel
prize in physics for 2020
has been awarded to sir roger penrose
professor andrea guezz
and professor reinhard genzel for their
research
on black holes so you can imagine that
someone like me who
does research in this area in this field
of supermassive black holes i was
absolutely elated at the news i was so
excited and it really is just a win
that's being claimed by the entirety of
the astronomy and astrophysics community
because
it's been a long-running joke in
astronomy over the past decade that
nobel prize you know they're not
bothered about astronomy because the
last one was sort of in 2006 or
something and then
bam two years in a row 2019 astronomy
for exoplanets and now
2020 astronomy for black holes
all right so this prize is shared
between the theoretical and the
observational side of things and that's
becoming
quite commonplace for the nobel prize
you know someone
would do the mathematics and the theory
back in the 20th century in this case
all the way back in the 60s
and then as our technology improves into
the 21st century we can then do
the observations or the experiment that
then proves
that mass in that theory the prediction
that was made back in the 20th century
and that's exactly what happened here so
sir roger penrose has been awarded the
nobel prize for work he did back in the
60s and 70s with none other than
stephen hawking they used einstein's
theory of general relativity
i.e a mathematical description for how
we think gravity
behaves in our universe and they used it
to predict
that black hole should exist i.e a point
in space where the gravity of an object
was so strong that it collapsed in on
itself
to give you this point of infinite
density
it's something that's called a
singularity now back then the idea of a
black hole you know an object so dense
that not even light is traveling fast
enough to escape
was just sort of a theoretical curiosity
or a mathematical curiosity you know it
wasn't considered
a real object but what penrose and
hawking
did was essentially show that
mathematically
they were inevitable in our universe and
if we had the mass of gravity right
then we should expect to see these
things
well you might be wondering why hawking
and penrose didn't win the prize sooner
since we've known of the existence of
black holes now for a very long time
well as i said the nobel prize committee
likes his theory to be observationally
or experimentally confirmed before
awarding the prize so for example
einstein in 1916 predicted gravitational
waves
and it wasn't until 2017 that the award
was made for the detection
of those gravitational waves another
example is
peter higgs predicting the higgs boson
back in the 60s and the nobel prize
wasn't awarded
again until the 21st century when that
detection was actually
made what i think has triggered the
nobel prize committee this year to award
it to black holes
was that incredible image we had last
year in 2019
the first ever image of a supermassive
black hole in the center of the messier
galaxy this image was made possible by a
huge team of people
worldwide bringing together a huge array
of radio telescopes to see something
so far away and you might be wondering
then
why did the event horizon collaboration
team not win the nobel prize why was it
not split between penrose and the eht
team
this is one of these very archaic
properties of the nobel prize it can
only actually be shared by three people
which isn't exactly in line with how
modern physics is done today
in these huge collaborations
and also it wasn't the eht image that
necessarily proved the existence
of black holes it was the first image we
had sure which was incredible
but we definitely knew about
supermassive black holes before then
even if that was sort of like the nail
in the coffin to confirm
yep that is definitely what we see in
the center of these galaxies
instead that proof came thanks to the
work of professor reinhard genzel from
the max plaque institute in munich
and to professor andrea guess from ucla
throughout the 90s and the 2000s now the
big question
in astrophysics back at the beginning of
the 90s was what is at the center of the
milky way
there's a lot of suspicions that it was
a black hole no one knew if it was or
how big it was and so that needed
proving now both gensel and getz were
involved in observing the stars at the
very center
of our galaxy specifically using
infrared telescopes so
infrared light has a much longer
wavelength than the visible light we see
with our eyes
which means it's not blocked by the tiny
particles of
dust that we find very concentrated in
the center of our galaxy so we can't
actually see the center of our galaxy
with visible light but we can with
infrared light
that thankfully manages to make its way
through
with that you can then observe the
positions and the speed that stars are
moving
around the center over many many years
and with that data you can then work out
the
orbits of those stars with our knowledge
then of how gravity works we can then
work out how big the object is that
those stars
are orbiting around and therefore work
out the mass
of the object in the center and
therefore if it is a black hole so this
was first done in 1996 by eckhart
and genzel with the new technology
telescope or the ntt
in chile they observed the positions and
the motions of 10 stars over four years
from 1992 to 1996.
they used that data to then model the
orbits of those stars around the center
of the milky way and derive a mass for
the thing at the center
of 2.45 million times
the mass of the sun give or take about
000 times the mass of the sun this was
an incredible result it was a proof of
concept first of all and it also showed
that there was clearly a
very massive and dark object a very
small space
in the center of the milky way but
this is science one result does not a
theory
make so in steps professor andrea guez
and her team at the ucla galactic center
group
to do this much more precisely with the
more high-resolution
keck telescopes on mauna kea hawaii
these use
lasers to record the turbulence in the
atmosphere i.e the turbulence that you
fly through on a plane
which is going to disrupt all the light
from the object that you're observing
they then subtract that turbulence from
what they're trying to observe
kind of like noise cancelling headphones
for a telescope
they observed over 500 stars over 12
years from 1995 to 2007
to get a mass for the black hole in the
center of
4.5 million times the mass of the sun
give or take 400 000 times the mass of
the sun or so
now they're still observing the stars in
the center of the milky way with the
keck telescope to this day
we've now actually seen one star s0-2
make a full orbit of the center in just
16 years it's observations like this
that left
no shadow of a doubt in physicist minds
that what was at the center of the milky
way
was a supermassive black hole and it fit
in with the theory that at the center of
every single galaxy in the universe
there's a supermassive black hole
that's what my research is on right now
i'm researching
how big are the supermassive black holes
in galaxies of different
shapes and can the shapes of those
galaxies tell us the evolutionary
history they've had have they merged
with another galaxy or they've been left
alone their entire life
and how is that affected how big the
black hole
can grow to but it's thanks to work by
the likes of penrose gensel
and getz that i can say this so casually
as if we have always known
this fact it's why i love making my
history of science videos to help people
understand where an idea has come from
over the years
so if you want the full story on how we
know
that there is a supermassive black hole
at the center of every galaxy which
includes
the work that was honored by the nobel
prize committee today i will link it for
you
up here you can check out if you want to
all right i am now
off to raise the glass in toast to every
single person over the past 60 years
that has made these nobel prize winning
results
possible okay so the nobel prize was
announced at 11 a.m this morning
by 12 30 i decided let's just film a
video in a day we could totally do it
i've just finished editing now it's 5
p.m i think this is the quickest
turnaround
ever on one of my videos and i
definitely need that drink now
you